..  _programming-languages:

Overview of Programming Languages
#################################

We are studying Programming in this course, but what exactly is that, anyway?

Programming
***********

A Definition:

Programming is the art of writing down a sequence of `statements` in some
`language` that convey `precisely` the `actions` we want a `computer` to take
on our behalf to solve some problem.

I highlighted a few terms here, what do they mean?

Language
========

You know what a language is, in your high-school English class (or whatever you
took as its equivalent) you learned a bunch of rules that defined how you
construct legal sentences in the language you were learning. We called these
rules the grammar of the language. In programming, we have many languages to
choose from, and often there are some languages better suited to certain
problems that other languages. (Programming is not about any one language, it
is about making the computer do tricks for us - in any language we choose!)

Statements
==========

In programming, statements are the equivalent of sentences in English.

Precisely
=========

Boy, this one is important! No matter how much you might like it to be so, a
computer will only do what you actually tell it to do, not what you meant to
tell it what to do, or what you want it to do!

Actions
=======

Every statement in a programming language has some meaning. We need to learn
what that meaning is. Some statements cause information to be set up inside the
computer, and other statements cause that information to be modified in some
way, or moved from place to place. We must understand exactly what will happen
when the computer processes each statement in our program.

Computer
========

Well, obviously, we are learning about programming computers, those patient,
fast, simple electronic gadgets we can hook up to all kinds of stuff and make
neat things happen. The languages we are interested are those invented to
express our wishes to computers!

However, those languages are also designed to express our wishes to other human
beings as well! You may well be the author of a program, but other folks will
need to use that program, fix that program, or evolve that program, so we need
to take care when we craft these things!

So, what are the things we will learn?

In learning about these programming languages, we will be using symbols from
the standard alphabet (including punctuation marks), found on the normal
computer keyboard.

We will learn how to arrange a small set of these symbols into something that
look like words, (just like in English - with spaces or punctuation marks
separating them) each of which will be used for some specific purpose.

We will learn how to arrange these words, together with some additional
punctuation marks, to form sentences in the language we are using. We will need
to learn the grammatical rules for the language so we can decide if the
sentences are legal or are gibberish. These rules define the Syntax of the
language.

We will need to learn exactly what the computer will do when it processes each
sentence. The meaning of the sentence is called the Semantics of the language.
In the computer world semantics can be defined mathematically - which leads to
very interesting ways to manipulate programs to create other programs with
exactly the same meaning!

Finally, we will learn how to arrange a set of sentences into larger blocks
called programs. Our knowledge of the meaning of each sentence will allow us to
think about how the computer will work through our program, and what it will
do. As we do this thinking, we should be able to convince ourselves (and
others) that our program is correct.

A lot of detail to think about and study, but, in the end, this can be a lot of
fun!

Why so many Languages?
**********************

Humans work on problems all the time. Each group of people working together to
solve a class of problem tends to design a notation that makes it easy for them
to express themselves clearly. Look at all the funny symbols mathematicians use
to do their work! When these folks start asking the computer to help them, they
often want to be able to use the same notation in their programs. So, they may
well design a language that is easy for them to work with. They probably do not
care if this language is going to be useful to any other group of people
working on other problems. Some people do try to build general purpose
languages, but these languages never seem to satisfy everyone.

So, we have a fair number of languages available to choose from to build
programs for our computer. Each should be studied to see what kinds of problems
it works well with, and that knowledge stored away for future reference. When
you have a specific problem to solve, choose the language best suited to that
problem (if your boss gives you the choice!).

What you really need to understand is how to make the computer do the tricks
you want, then find out how to express those wishes in the language you have
chosen for your program.

We will be using C++ for most of this course, because it is the most commonly
used language around today. Tomorrow, who knows!

